README.md, before:

# linker_report.py

## Introduction

The linker_report.py generates a list of symbols in the form of a JSON tree or
a Wiki table. The script accepts several ELF files (executable, object or
archives). It uses the tools *nm* and *readelf* of GNU binutils to get the list
of symbols.

## Usage

```
usage: linker_report.py [-h] [--object OBJECTFILE [OBJECTFILE ...]]
                        [--archive ARCHIVEFILE [ARCHIVEFILE ...]]
                        [--elf ELFFILE [ELFFILE ...]] [--human-readable]
                        [--summarize] [--filter FILTER [FILTER ...]]
                        [--out-format [OUTPUT_FORMAT]] [--out [OUTPUT_FILE]]
```

## Examples

We create some object file and an archive.

```console
$ echo "const char* var1 = \"test\"; int var2 = 32;" | gcc -x c - -c -o object1.o
$ echo "const int var3 = 32;" | gcc -x c - -c -o object2.o
$ ar cr ./archive.a ./object1.o ./object2.o
```

Generate a JSON file with the tree of object files and symbols contained in
an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --archive archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var1",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 8
                },
                {
                    "name": "var2",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 4
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var3",
                    "type": "constant",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 4,
                    "data_size": 0
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

Generate a JSON file with the objects contained in an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --summarize --archive archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0
        },
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12
        }
    ]
}
```

Generate a wiki table with the symbols contained in an object file:

```console
$ linker_report.py --human-readable --out-format table --object object1.o
||Name||Program size||Data size||Read-only data size||
|object1.o|  0B| 12B|  0B|
|var2|  0B|  4B|  0B|
|var1|  0B|  8B|  0B|
```

We need now an executable ELF file.

```console
$ echo "const char* var1 = \"test\"; int var2 = 32; int main(void) {printf(\"bonjour\");}" | gcc -x c -
```

Generate a JSON object with the symbols contained in an executable file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --elf a.out
{
    "name": "a.out",
    "type": "executable",
    "program_size": 70,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 69,
    "sub_nodes": ...
}
```

Note here that we use the flag *--elf*. The difference with *--object* and
*--archive* is that the first get the list of symbols via *readelf* and the
second via *nm*.

Some filters are implemented. These filter are only applicable on symbols. The
tree structure with the containers (object or archive files) is still
generated.

Generate a wiki table with all the symbols smaller than 8 bytes contained in an
archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --filter "size<8" --out-format table --archive ./archive.a
||Name||Program size||Data size||Read-only data size||
|archive.a|0|12|4|
|object1.o|0|12|0|
|var2|0|4|0|
|object2.o|0|0|4|
|var3|0|0|4|
```

Generate JSON object with the symbol "var1" contained in an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --filter "name=var1" --archive ./archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0,
            "sub_nodes": []
        },
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var1",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 8
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

## Examples with jq

We cannot directly compare two JSON outpus with diff, as the symbols are not
sorted. But we can use *jq* to sort the symbols in alphabetical order:

```console
$ linker_report.py --elf ./archive.a | jq ".sub_nodes | sort_by(.name)"
[
  {
    "name": "var1",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 8
  },
  {
    "name": "var2",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var3",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  }
]
```

Note that to be able to execute the previous jq program, we need a flat
*sub_nodes* list. If we use --archive (or --object), *linker_report* will call
*nm* and be able to build a tree. In order to get a flat *sub_nodes*,
linker_report shall call *readelf*, it is why we use the *--elf* flag.

In the same way, we can sort the symbols according to their size in data
sections (.data, .bss or .rodata):

```console
$ linker_report.py --elf ./archive.a | jq ".sub_nodes | sort_by(.data_size)"
[
  {
    "name": "var2",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var3",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var1",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 8
  }
]
```

Commit message:

Replace the confusing --elf parameter by --executable. Add a flag --use-readelf.

README.md, after:

# linker_report.py

## Introduction

The linker_report.py generates a list of symbols in the form of a JSON tree or
a Wiki table. The script accepts several ELF files (executable, object or
archives). It uses the tools *nm* and *readelf* of GNU binutils to get the list
of symbols.

## Usage

```
usage: linker_report.py [-h] [--object OBJECTFILE [OBJECTFILE ...]]
                        [--archive ARCHIVEFILE [ARCHIVEFILE ...]]
                        [--executable EXEFILE [EXEFILE ...]] [--use-readelf]
                        [--human-readable] [--summarize]
                        [--filter FILTER [FILTER ...]]
                        [--out-format [OUTPUT_FORMAT]] [--out [OUTPUT_FILE]]
```

## Examples

We create some object ELF file and an archive.

```console
$ echo "const char* var1 = \"test\"; int var2 = 32;" | gcc -x c - -c -o object1.o
$ echo "const int var3 = 32;" | gcc -x c - -c -o object2.o
$ ar cr ./archive.a ./object1.o ./object2.o
```

Generate a JSON file with the tree of object files and symbols contained in
an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --archive archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var1",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 8
                },
                {
                    "name": "var2",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 4
                }
            ]
        },
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var3",
                    "type": "constant",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 4,
                    "data_size": 0
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

Generate a JSON file with the objects contained in an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --summarize --archive archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0
        },
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12
        }
    ]
}
```

Generate a wiki table with the symbols contained in an object file:

```console
$ linker_report.py --human-readable --out-format table --object object1.o
||Name||Program size||Data size||Read-only data size||
|object1.o|  0B| 12B|  0B|
|var2|  0B|  4B|  0B|
|var1|  0B|  8B|  0B|
```

We need now an executable ELF file.

```console
$ echo "const char* var1 = \"test\"; int var2 = 32; int main(void) {printf(\"bonjour\");}" | gcc -x c -
```

Generate a JSON object with the symbols contained in an executable file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --executable a.out
{
    "name": "a.out",
    "type": "executable",
    "program_size": 70,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 69,
    "sub_nodes": ...
}
```

Their is no functional difference by giving the input files via
*--executable*, *--object* or *--archive*. The only difference will be the
*type* field of the root object in the JSON output file.

Some filters are implemented. These filter are only applicable on symbols. The
tree structure with the containers is still generated.

Generate a wiki table with all the symbols smaller than 8 bytes contained in an
archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --filter "size<8" --out-format table --archive ./archive.a
||Name||Program size||Data size||Read-only data size||
|archive.a|0|12|4|
|object1.o|0|12|0|
|var2|0|4|0|
|object2.o|0|0|4|
|var3|0|0|4|
```

Generate JSON object with the symbol "var1" contained in an archive file.

```console
$ linker_report.py --filter "name=var1" --archive ./archive.a
{
    "name": "archive.a",
    "type": "archive",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 4,
    "data_size": 12,
    "sub_nodes": [
        {
            "name": "object2.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 4,
            "data_size": 0,
            "sub_nodes": []
        },
        {
            "name": "object1.o",
            "type": "object",
            "program_size": 0,
            "ro_data_size": 0,
            "data_size": 12,
            "sub_nodes": [
                {
                    "name": "var1",
                    "type": "variable",
                    "program_size": 0,
                    "ro_data_size": 0,
                    "data_size": 8
                }
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

## Examples with jq

We cannot directly compare two JSON outpus with diff, as the symbols are not
sorted. But we can use *jq* to sort the symbols in alphabetical order:

```console
$ linker_report.py --use-readelf --archive ./archive.a | jq ".sub_nodes | sort_by(.name)"
[
  {
    "name": "var1",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 8
  },
  {
    "name": "var2",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var3",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  }
]
```

Note that to be able to execute the previous jq program, we need a flat
*sub_nodes* list. In order to get a flat *sub_nodes*, linker_report shall call
*readelf*, so we use the *--use-readelf* flag.

In the same way, we can sort the symbols according to their size in data
sections (.data, .bss or .rodata):

```console
$ linker_report.py --use-readelf --archive ./archive.a | jq ".sub_nodes | sort_by(.data_size)"
[
  {
    "name": "var2",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var3",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 4
  },
  {
    "name": "var1",
    "type": "variable",
    "program_size": 0,
    "ro_data_size": 0,
    "data_size": 8
  }
]
```
